June, 1940. As spring fades towards summer German victory in the Battle of France becomes a certainty and the thoughts of those committed to continuing French resistance turn to the other France, her vast colonial empire, the France beyond the seas, La France d'outre mer.

     The Germans took Paris and the government fled to Tours. The Germans crossed the Loire and the government moved on to Bordeaux. The Nazi war machine was sure to occupy the whole of metropolitan France. The government of the Third Republic began preparations for a move to Algeria. The senators and deputies of the National Assembly would depart directly from Bordeaux. President Lebrun, Premier Reynaud and the cabinet would make their way to Perpignan delaying their move across the Mediterranean until the last possible moment. Marshal Petain agreed to remain and reassure the populace that they had not been abandoned. General DeGaulle made his way to England to co-ordinate British assistance in the move when he returned a day later all had changed. Pierre Laval had carried the day for defeatism. The evil Auvergnat excoriated the ministers for daring to think they could abandon the soil of France and still maintain the confidence of the people. Reynaud was forced out. Petain assumed the premiership and President Lebrun concurred. Laval upheld the reputation of Bordeaux as the city where France went to loose. A handful of deputies and ministers, those most ardently opposed to capitulation, made their way to North Africa where they where promptly arrested.
     General DeGaulle returned to London to broadcast his call to honor and develop the means by which France could one day liberate herself. The overseas empire would figure prominently in his thinking.
     "In the vast spaces of Africa, France could in fact re-create for herself an army and a sovereignty, while waiting for the entry of fresh allies at the side of the old ones to reverse the balance of forces. When that happened Africa, being within reach of the peninsulas of Italy, the Balkans and Spain, would offer an excellent base for the return to Europe, and it would be French. What was more, the national liberation, if accomplished one day thanks to the forces of the Empire, would establish links of solidarity between Metropolitan France and the overseas territories. If, on the contrary, the war were to end without the Empire having made any effort to save the mother country, that would be the end, without a doubt, of the work of France in Africa."
     One can but wonder if the General had slightest imagining of the obstacles he would face in harnessing the might of empire to the task of liberating the mother country. Four long years would pass before the French Army of Africa would land on the beaches of Corsica and Provence to the chant of C'est Nous les Africains. The Empire was home to a people as vast and varied in opinion as they were geographically separated. Algeria was home to a million European colonists who lived a myth that their three departments were as French as any other. The reforms proposed by Blum's Popular Front and eight million Moslems in their midst became a cloud darkening their sunny dreams of a France one and only from Dunkirk to Tammenrasset. Algeria was firm in its support of Vichy. British attacks on the French fleet pushed the Admiralty and the powers of West and North Africa firmly into Petains hands. Churchill was supportive but unilateral British actions in Syria, Lebanon, Madagascar and Somaliland led DeGaulle to suspect the British Foreign Office of planning a future in which the French would be shutout of the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. Roosevelt regarded him as a deluded figure who fancied himself a mixture of Napoleon and Joan of Arc. American policy tilted towards Vichy in hopes that one day the Marshal and his henchmen would see the light and return to war at the side of the old Allies. French territories in the West Indies would be kept out the hands of those Secretary of State Hull termed, "the so called Free French", until long after the Axis ended the charade of Vichy and occupied the whole of metropolitan France in the wake of the American landings in North Africa.

